path queries solution (#910)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/CSES Path Queries.mdx

id: cses-1138
source: CSES
title: Path Queries
author: Benjamin Qi, Neo Wang
---

**Explanation:** [CPH 18.2](/CPH.pdf#page=174)

Unlike the above explanation, instead of storing the subtree size, we can instead perform an Euler Tour in order to determine the bounds of each node's subtree. 

> Notice that when we update a node with value $A[s]$ to $x$, the root-to-node sum in its subtree increases by the difference $x-A[s]$. However, such updates occur on a range of values, so using a segment tree with point updates alone will not suffice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that when we update a node with value $A[s]$ to $x$, the root-to-node sum in its subtree increases by the difference $x-A[s]$. Using ETT, this is equivalent to range update.
```

> Instead, we can use a Fenwick tree which supports range sum updates in $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use a Fenwick tree which supports range sum updates in $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time.
```

When implementing your solution, recall that incrementing a range $[a, b]$ with a Fenwick tree corresponds to the operations

<center>

$$\text{upd}(a, x)$$

$$\text{upd}(b+1, x)$$

</center>

> **Time Complexity:** $(N+Q)\log N$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O((N+Q)\log N)$
```

	}
}

/**
 * Author: Lukas Polacek
 * Date: 2009-10-30
 * License: CC0
 * Source: folklore/TopCoder
 * Description: Computes partial sums a[0] + a[1] + ... + a[pos - 1],
 * and updates single elements a[i],
 * taking the difference between the old and new value.
 * Time: Both operations are $O(\log N)$.
 * Status: Stress-tested
 */

struct FT {
	vector<ll> s;
	FT(int n) : s(n) {}
	void update(int pos, ll dif) { // a[pos] += dif
		for (; pos < sz(s); pos |= pos + 1) s[pos] += dif;
	}
	ll query(int pos) { // sum of values in [0, pos)
		ll res = 0;
		for (; pos > 0; pos &= pos - 1) res += s[pos-1];
		return res;
	}
	int lower_bound(ll sum) {// min pos st sum of [0, pos] >= sum
		// Returns n if no sum is >= sum, or -1 if empty sum is.
		if (sum <= 0) return -1;
		int pos = 0;
		for (int pw = 1 << 25; pw; pw >>= 1) {
			if (pos + pw <= sz(s) && s[pos + pw-1] < sum)
				pos += pw, sum -= s[pos-1];
		}
		return pos;
	}
};

const int mx = 2e5+1;

vi adj[mx];
int A[mx];
int st[mx];
int en[mx];
int timer = 0;
FT ft(mx+1);

void dfs(int x, int p) { // euler tour
	st[x] = timer++;
	for(const int &e : adj[x]) if(e != p) dfs(e, x);
	en[x] = timer-1;
}

int main() {

> 	setIO("");

Reviewer 2: should just be `setIO();` ...

id: cses-1138
source: CSES
title: Path Queries
author: Benjamin Qi, Neo Wang
---

**Explanation:** [CPH 18.2](/CPH.pdf#page=174)

> Unlike the above explanation, instead of storing the subtree size, we can instead perform an Euler Tour in order to determine the bounds of each node's subtree. 

Reviewer 2: The only difference is that you store the right index of the subtree instead of the subtree size. You make it sound like the above explanation doesn't involve performing an Euler tour?

> Notice that when we update a node with value $A[s]$ to $x$, the root-to-node sum in its subtree increases by the difference $x-A[s]$. Using ETT, this is equivalent to range update.

Reviewer 2: > the root-to-node sum in its subtree

the root-to-node sum for each node in its subtree?

> We can use a Fenwick tree which supports range sum updates in $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time.

Reviewer 2: and point query?

> We can use a Fenwick tree which supports range sum updates and point queries in $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time.

Reviewer 2: > range sum updates

I think range increment is more appropriate

When implementing your solution, recall that incrementing a range $[a, b]$ with a Fenwick tree corresponds to the operations

> <center>

Reviewer 2: no need for this? can just do

```
$$
expression
$$
```

Author: o

$$\text{upd}(a, x)$$

> $$\text{upd}(b+1, x)$$

Reviewer 2: -x?

\text{upd}(b+1, -x)
$$

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O((N+Q)\log N)$

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h> // see /general/running-code-locally
using namespace std;

using ll = long long;

using vi = vector<int>;
#define pb push_back
#define all(x) begin(x), end(x)
#define sz(x) (int)(x).size()

void setIO(string name = "") {
	cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0); // see /general/fast-io
	if (sz(name)) {
		freopen((name+".in").c_str(), "r", stdin); // see /general/io
		freopen((name+".out").c_str(), "w", stdout);
	}
}

/**
 * Author: Lukas Polacek
 * Date: 2009-10-30
 * License: CC0
 * Source: folklore/TopCoder
 * Description: Computes partial sums a[0] + a[1] + ... + a[pos - 1],
 * and updates single elements a[i],
 * taking the difference between the old and new value.
 * Time: Both operations are $O(\log N)$.
 * Status: Stress-tested
 */

struct FT {
	vector<ll> s;
	FT(int n) : s(n) {}
	void update(int pos, ll dif) { // a[pos] += dif
		for (; pos < sz(s); pos |= pos + 1) s[pos] += dif;
	}
	ll query(int pos) { // sum of values in [0, pos)
		ll res = 0;
		for (; pos > 0; pos &= pos - 1) res += s[pos-1];
		return res;
	}

> 	int lower_bound(ll sum) {// min pos st sum of [0, pos] >= sum

Reviewer 2: leave this out

Reviewer 2: should be all
